---
title: Equilibrium Tests in Polyploids
category: research
layout: default
description: Novel methods to test for equilibrium in autopolyploids.
---

Testing for Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium is a fundamental step in many
genetic analysis procedures. The literature on testing for equilibrium
in diploids is vast, but it's much more limited when it comes to
polyploids. It turns out that this is a significant omission from the
literature, since equilibrium tests are hampered by the presence of
double reduction.

Double reduction, the co-migration of sister chromatids into the same
gamete during meiosis, is a phenomenon in autopolyploids which can
affect equilibrium genotype frequencies, increasing the Type I error
rate for standard methods that test for equilibrium.

For example, here is a plot of Type I error (y-axis) against different
levels of realistic double reduction (x-axis) in a simulated
autotetraploid sample of 1000 individuals. The red line is a typical
method folks use to test for equilibrium in autopolyploids. The
nominal level is 0.05 (horizontal dashed line), however the naive
method only controls for Type I error at this nominal level when there
is low/no double reduction.

<img src="{{ site.url }}/fig/t1e.png" width=600/>

I tackle equilibrium testing in my manuscript (Gerard, 2021) using two
main approaches: (i) a likelihood ratio test, and (ii) a novel
U-statistic minimization approach which generalizes the classical
&#967;<sup>2</sup> test from diploids to autopolyploids.  You can see
in the figure above that these tests both are able to control for Type
I error across the range of double reduction rates.

There are other contributions in this manuscript:

(i) I highlight the difficulty in distinguishing between random
mating and equilibrium in autotetraploids, as this has been a point of
some confusion in the literature.

(ii) I provide estimates of double reduction rates given equilibrium. No
other principled methods currently exist to estimate double reduction
rates in natural autopolyploid populations. Though, I highlight the
uncertainty of such estimates using just biallelic loci.

(iii) I create a bootstrap approach to account for genotype uncertainty.

Check out my new preprint on bioRxiv:

Gerard, D. (2021). Double reduction estimation and equilibrium tests in natural autopolyploid populations. *bioRxiv* \<[doi:10.1101/2021.09.24.461731](https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.09.24.461731)\>
